St 
Steve Allen Interview # VRV-V-D-2015-064 
4 
My corpsmen were always ready to take care of the indigenous people. 
know giving them medicine, treating wounds, ear infections, it’s a litany of 
things that they did. 
We carried around sea rations. 
the rice that we captured at different places. 
Like I say, that was our diet. 
you didn’t have it on your back, you weren’t going to eat that day. 
that, we would go into places way out in areas that were called free fire zones 
that anybody out there is supposed to be the enemy, well there people who 
had not vacated. 
It was very obvious that they were not combatants. 
would share their rations with them knowing that they may go hungry for a 
day or two. 
That was not an uncommon occurrence. 
morality, it’s not perfect don’t get me wrong, but what was good in me, I think 
my Christian faith was at the center of that. 
my other troupes. 
I think that’s a real strength. 
Kranich Going off of your men’s interactions with the locals, did you ever encounter 
any fear from the local Vietnamese people when you guys encountered them 
Allen Yes. 
the South Vietnamese forces, of the Korean Marines, of the NVA, and of the 
VC because whenever battle was engaged, if shots rang out, if an explosion 
went off, the bullets started flying and they could be pretty indiscriminate. 
Now the people that I was around for the most part in the bush didn’t have 
much fear of us. 
to be much fear. 
out begging for candy or cigarettes or whatever they could get. 
five and six year olds begging for cigarettes. 
myself. 
perhaps where the American troupes had a different attitude. 
I’ll give you an example of one of the things that happened. 
One time we were patrolling through, I think it was Santana Valley, but it way 
out there where the bad guys are. 
hills there running toward our platoon. 
It was rainy and cold. 
of Vietnam as cold, but it could be. 
She ran to us. 
come through her village. 
The NVA had and took some of their people. 
was being used as a porter and pretty much I think as a sex slave as well. 
took her into our platoon, and whenever we could get a med-evac chopper in 
then we flew her out to safety. 
atrocities that the North did. 
Americans were involved in and responsible for, it’s very good that they be 
examined and the people be punished harshly for those kinds of criminal acts. 
However, I can tell you this from my experience what we did paled in 
comparison to what the North Vietnamese Army did and what the Vietcong 
did to those people. 
Steve Allen Interview # VRV-V-D-2015-064 
5 
Kranich Going back to when you decided to enlist in the military, you said it was 
something you wanted to do when you were 17 years-old, but you waited a 
few years. 
Allen You know what And that changed a lot. 
I’m glad you asked that question. 
the time I was 17 and the time I was 21 when I actually went in, as a matter of 
fact had just turned 22. 
Vietnam was a blip on the screen. 
Tet, major battles, thousands of lives lost by that time, all of the politics 
swirling on both sides, and anybody that went into that without reservations 
was not a thinking person. 
When I was 17, I was gung-ho. 
World War II father. 
them were in the service during World War II. 
the bad guys all the time when I was growing up because there was World 
War II. 
being a solider, being a soldier, an airman or a Marine, that was something 
that guys wanted to do to protect the country as part of the patriotism and 
loyalty America stood for. 
continue to be a patriot. 
were doing was right or wrong. 
I just finished a book by a friend of mine, just finished reading it yesterday. 
He was in my class out at Quantico. 
lieutenant in Vietnam, and the guy with all the questions of right or wrong, 
good or bad. 
protest Do you hold true Those questions all came to me, too. 
was doing an immoral enterprise Those questions ring with me today. 
feel that if we had kept our course there, certainly militarily we won every 
major engagement that we were ever in. 
butts of our enemy, but politically we certainly didn’t. 
North Vietnam and a South Vietnam much like we have a North Korea and 
South Korea today, but we did not have the will or stamina to do that. 
I think that we had the vision to do that. 
government in South Vietnam which stood in the way of that as well as people 
back here who got to the point where it became impossible for us to win that 
war even though their leaders, General Jap and others later on, said that they 
were within days of capitulating if we had just stayed with it. 
must learn from that. 
I was out in Washington D.C. 
Arlington cemetery when Caspar Weinberger spoke. 
couple thousand troupes in there at the time because we were out there for the 
dedication of the Vietnam wall. 
engage in a war that it doesn’t intend to win.
”I’m paraphrasing. 
went crazy because all the guys knew that we had been sold short. 
painful to think about that. 
relationship you don’t have outside of combat, when their names are on that 
wall, you have to question this country’s resolve. 
Steve Allen Interview # VRV-V-D-2015-064 
6 
mistake again of being involved in something that you intend to follow 
through with. 
Getting a little preachy there I guess. 
Kranich With those seven men, what was it like losing them in Vietnam 
Allen Well the first three, like I say, this was after I was gone. 
happened just two or three days after I left. 
man, a kid named Tommy Smith. 
He was just a terrific Marine. 
fact, anybody that stayed in the bush anytime at all, they were brave and pretty 
selfless people. 
They bought into the brotherhood. 
hack it, they were gone in two or three weeks or two or three days. 
we didn’t want them there if you weren’t going to protect your brother. 
Everybody was scared, but if you couldn’t control your fear and manage your 
fear then you were a liability to the outfit. 
first one whose body I identified. 
imagine. 
than a couple arm lengths apart. 
we were hooch-mates. 
We ate together. 
We traveled right next to each other. 
We got shot at together. 
We took care of each other. 
saved my life once or twice. 
I was there to protect him, too. 
at gray’s registration just lying on a table, to this day it bothers me, not like it 
did then. 
of two or three of them. 
forget because they were a different kind of family, but they were family. 
experiences you go through in a war situation when you’re actually in combat, 
the way you rely on one another, the crazy humor that you have, the black 
humor, and the way that we realized a lot of that tension was sometimes 
absolutely nutty. 
It goes beyond what the boys at the frat house do. 
build such a common bond that nothing else in life will ever be quite like it. 
There’s nobody that I love more than my wife, my children, and my 
grandchildren, and my brothers and sisters, and relative, and my other friends 
I have in my church, but once again there’s this piece over here that nobody 
can ever touch in terms of how I feel about those people. 
Kranich Can you provide me an example You have to go id these bodies. 
take me into that moment 
Allen Of course I was coming from the bush, and I came back there. 
came back to the rear in Da Nang, it was pretty safe back there. 
have to worry about getting shot at. 
your guard up. 
I went to where graves registration is, and there’s guys there. 
Those are just Marines that got stuck with this job. 
bodies, and you can imagine some of them are badly torn up. 
very respectful. 
They understood my grief. 
my friends that I went through the training at Quantico with was with the jag 
office. 
He was a lawyer with Judge Advocate General’s office in Da Nang. 
course, I saw my buddy there. 
Steve Allen Interview # VRV-V-D-2015-064 
7 
they knew the right things to say. 
They knew I was grieving. 
was ok to leave. 
I went back to where my buddy was. 
coming back to the rear, and he and his friends got together. 
beer and talked it through. 
would have talked about that with were the guys from my platoon who were 
no longer, I was no longer a part of that unit. 
and I was not allowed to go back and be with them. 
there to help my process it and his friends. 
That was positive. 
and I can remember grieving back home, I mean for years. 
about Smitty. 
I got in touch with his family. 
That was hard to do. 
years later, I finally found his family, wrote them a letter. 
them. 
They had to process a lot. 
hated me for getting in touch with him and bringing all that up. 
two brothers and one sister, and his mother and father were still alive. 
didn’t know about him receiving a medal for his heroism. 
extraordinary thing when he was killed that rated a much higher medal than he 
was awarded. 
know what happened with him and to understand what kind of warrior he was. 
In the long run, it became a very healing experience for them. 
through a lot of their grief. 
through before and this dredged up a lot of things, but a lot of formerly 
unanswered questions were resolved. 
or not. 
Kranich What was the thing that Smitty did before he died to win the medal 
Allen Our company, a battalion has different companies within it, my company was 
Charlie Company, C-Company. 
called the Song-Li Li River. 
embedded in there and had bunkers and had laid down heavy fire on Bravo 
Company. 
relieve them. 
Well, we started getting chopped apart too. 
place where they could cross. 
It was like river, little island, river. 
talking about the Mississippi River, I’m talking about the river out here. 
maybe a little bigger. 
pinned in so well that we lost fifteen guys that night. 
out and retrieve them, and they’d get killed. 
was to have either artillery or something else come in and relieve the pressure. 
The fire was so intense. 
fast movers, jets, who would come through with rockets, napalm bombs, that 
kind of thing to dislodge the enemy or at least to get their heads down. 
Problem with that was you have to use what we call a smoke grenade that 
would mark the area for the jets to know where to shoot, where not to shoot, 
so you don’t blow out your friendly forces and you actually hit the enemy. 
The fire was so intense that it seemed almost impossible for anybody to be 
able to take that smoke grenade and go out there. 
me of the Bronze Star citation he got. 
Steve Allen Interview # VRV-V-D-2015-064 
8 
will do this. 
I can do this.
the smoke grenades, ran out and fully exposed himself, threw the grenade 
successfully marking the territory and took a bullet through the chest. 
on the helicopter on the way in. 
this on the radio and just had a real hard time with that because I felt like I 
should have been out there with those guys. 
platoon, but the orders from headquarters said no, he’s going back to a new 
job. 
That was real, real hard for me, but Smitty was truly a hero. 
in. 
The situation got a lot better, and our guys got extricated. 
don’t think he was taken care of properly there. 
Silver Star or Navy Cross. 
selfless heroic act, it was also a very successful endeavor. 
the mission that nobody else was going to do. 
Kranich Looking back on Smitty’s death and your experience particularly in the 
moment hearing it on the radio, with forty plus years gone by, what does that 
mean to you now How do feel looking back on it 
Allen Oh, I’ve adjusted well to that. 
You’re not going to change it. 
have to have faith that you know God has the answers. 
someday. 
I might not. 
I feel that Smitty’s taken care. 
his family had to have the grief that they had. 
thing for all of my Marines. 
contacted her and she found out all of this, she started putting together a 
reunion for my Marines. 
I didn’t know where any of these guys were. 
worked hard, and she and her husband and her family went to a lot of expense, 
endless hours of their time and their money to bring us together as a platoon. 
Since then we have met at different times, different places. 
out at Washington, D.C. 
Memorial together. 
never have happened. 
of us. 
years and feel that bond was still there. 
It’s a wonderful thing that she did. 
Kranich In particular with your reunion in D.
was like having the majority of your company with you at the Vietnam wall 
Allen We must have had twenty guys, maybe two dozen. 
I don’t know. 
were able to be there, including one of the platoon commanders that came 
after I was gone that my guys had a lot of respect for. 
Mall, and it was a nice summer day. 
memorial, and then started to match up to the Wall together. 
security people says you can’t walk across that grass. 
there. 
I thought if we can’t, who the hell can It was so petty. 
disturbing anything. 
I understand they have their rules. 
understand what we were about and the fact that we were just going up there 
to pay respects to our buddies whose names were on that wall. 
Steve Allen Interview # VRV-V-D-2015-064 
9 
one of the most healing experiences I’ve ever had in terms of Vietnam and 
what it represented. 
controversial thing. 
kinds of controversy. 
monuments and did the Vietnam veteran get A slash in the ground with a big 
slab of black marble. 
You know what The impact of that is amazing. 
know if the designers and builders knew the impact it would have, if they 
were that prophetic, but it certainly does its job. 
far as most of my guys are concerned, as you walk down into the middle of 
that it envelops you. 
and the reflection of your loved ones up there, I don’t know. 
something pretty special about it. 
grief and our love. 
Maybe it can be a boulder or a tree and do the same thing. 
don’t know, but the energy it had, the power of healing it had, I think was 
primarily because of the grief, the compassion, the love, and the loyalty that 
we all felt that we bring in there. 
That’s not just true for the Vietnam veteran. 
It’s true for the Vietnam veteran’s family. 
come home. 
The mothers, fathers, sisters, brother, aunts, uncles, cousins. 
people who lost people dear to them. 
coming in with a heavy heart and wanting some kind of absolution. 
that that internal spiritual energy is maybe what brings about such a cathartic 
experience for the people who are there. 
Kranich Bringing it back to your time in college, the fact that you graduated college 
before you joined the Marines, can you speak a little bit about what that was 
like The fact that you had a college degree going into the Marines, what that 
allowed you to do 
Allen First of all, let me tell you I was amazed that I graduated from college. 
school, yeah I was the first member of my family to graduate from college. 
wasn’t really on the ticket. 
smorgasbord of life to me. 
classes. 
Some of the classes I liked. 
things. 
school I went to. 
play. 
If you want to be in a musical group, it’s there. 
intramural sports, there’s a wealth of that. 
involved in. 
That was a real time of development for me. 
interesting that those experiences helped me be a better platoon commander. 
That thread went on through because I had a wide range of experiences. 
think it’s unfortunate when kids get to the university and just are, maybe 
because of the program and where they are, they’re so focused on one area 
that they don’t get out here and test the water in other areas. 
for me in my experience, having experienced those other areas allowed me to 
understand my men a lot better. 
Steve Allen Interview # VRV-V-D-2015-064 
10 
We had Native Americans in my platoon, Samoan, Hawaiian, Chicago black 
guys, southern black guys, southern white guys, New Jersey guys, farm boys 
like me. 
different. 
The thing we had in common was that we were combat Marines. 
college experience helped me have a lot better handle on how to handle each 
individual. 
That ironically led to my career later on. 
enjoyed listening to these guys, talking to these guys. 
I was the old guy. 
like 23 years-old. 
They were 18, 19, and 20 for the most part. 
guys, 21 or 22 you know. 
They didn’t have much direction in their lives. 
Several of them never graduated from high school. 
what they’re going to do when we’re done with this You’ve got an incredible 
foundation now. 
You’re going to have experiences nobody else ever had. 
can cripple you or it can strengthen you. 
things. 
something with it that was as satisfying to me as being a platoon commander. 
When I came back to the states, I went to graduate school and got a couple 
graduate degrees in counseling. 
counselor and certainly no regrets there. 
Kranich In college, was there a lot of protesting against the war 
Allen Yeah, there was. 
There were protests against the war when I was in college. 
have a problem with some of them, and I don’t have a problem with some of 
them. 
the war. 
and nail against it, protested it. 
day, but what I saw a lot of, too, were people that jumped on the bandwagon 
looking for a good time. 
I can remember one time they decided to go down the streets of Charleston, 
and the people leading it I think had good intentions. 
they’re busting store windows, opening up water hydrants, and acting like 
total fools. 
respect for. 
Their hearts nor their heads were in the right place. 
looking for some kind of silly party. 
heroic as the people who were truly trying to do the right thing. 
have a problem with people like that, the people that jump on the bandwagon 
and just are there for the excitement or the thrill of it. 
people like that. 
I don’t know how you can be like that. 
always think of when this question comes up too, two friends from that era 
who went to Canada. 
to get drafted, did not want to go to prison, and it tortured him because he 
loved this country. 
He finally made the decision to go to Canada. 
problem with him, never have, never will. 
on the other end of the spectrum. 
but himself. 
He wasn’t there to make a statement. 
was take care of himself. 
Steve Allen Interview # VRV-V-D-2015-064 
11 
motives. 
I have respect for one, have no respect for the other. 
grew and grew and grew. 
had those core moral choices to make, but I have a lot of problem with people 
who just wanted to do what was popular. 
Kranich Could you take me into that moment where there was the somewhat rioting in 
Charleston Did you ever expect anything like that to happen while in school 
Allen Well, no. 
goofier all the time. 
surprised. 
There may have been, but nobody knew about it. 
were openly smoking marijuana and doing other drugs. 
change in that time. 
school there was another sea change in the way the liberal attitude towards 
drugs and sex and the whole thing. 
immensely in that amount of time. 
was never. 
I saw that happen. 
I was gone. 
found out I ever vandalized anything, there would have been hell to pay. 
the same way with my kids. 
You don’t destroy other people’s property. 
don’t destroy public property to make a statement. 
That’s stupid. 
do anything for anybody. 
state your case, and stand by it. 
I heard they were doing, I stayed away from that for the most part. 
my cup of tea. 
Kranich I know that you brought it up just a little bit ago about the draft. 
you didn’t have a whole lot of interaction with the draft because you enlisted. 
Can you talk about what your views were on the draft when you were leading 
your men in the company 
Allen Yeah, because certainly that was an issue with a lot of my guys. 
an issue with my fellow because several of them had been drafted. 
in the day, the Marine Corps only takes volunteers. 
out from some of them. 
They got their draft notice. 
physical. 
They passed their physical. 
sergeant comes through and says, “One, two, three, four, five, six, Marine.
All of a sudden they were drafted into the Marine Corps. 
shock to several of them. 
I had a couple of kids sent there by the judge. 
They’d screwed up, nothing major. 
been in trouble for a couple of other minor crimes, but they were bordering on 
felonies or were felonies. 
Judges said Marine Corps or jail. 
Marine Corps and ended up in the bush wondering if they made the right 
decision. 
Yeah the draft, it touched a lot of people. 
Right or wrong, you know. 
War is wrong. 
It’s a real breakdown in leadership. 
between people, but it’s there. 
It’s a reality. 
intense enough, of course the governments can script people and put them into 
the war. 
It’s a horrible thing. 
Steve Allen Interview # VRV-V-D-2015-064 
12 
know. 
I didn’t really want to be in the bush. 
sometimes there’s that excitement about gee I wonder what it’s like. 
to test yourself. 
run and hide I think that’s maybe an unfortunate part of who we are as 
people that we think we have to be tested in that way to determine whether or 
not we are brave or courageous because there are so many ways to be brave or 
courageous. 
Yeah the draft was a big issue for the guys who got drafted. 
Kranich One of the things that I’m personally wondering about, and we talked about 
this on Saturday a little bit, was your time in the bush as you describe it. 
you speak a little bit about what an average day and night is in the bush 
Allen Well, when I first got into the bush we were on a L9-53 in the Que Son 
Mountains just over the base camp. 
There was a lot of action up there. 
cold and rainy. 
You’re at a pretty high elevation. 
going through training and everything they talk about how hot it was and how 
miserably hot it was. 
off. 
You were always wet. 
You laid on the ground. 
You didn’t have a cot. 
didn’t have any kind of protection at all. 
laid down, but that didn’t help much. 
head and tried to sleep. 
Sometimes you put together a kind of a tent. 
with a buddy, for me it was my radio man. 
get some sticks, and make kind of a tent to keep the driving rain off of you 
anyway. 
Or a lot of times it was just constant mist or sprinkle. 
dry, but at least it wasn’t beating down on you then. 
because the VC and the NVA always knew where we were. 
any place or any time that the enemy wasn’t aware of basically where the unit 
movements were. 
I’m talking about weeks and months. 
mountains or down in the valleys, they always knew where we were. 
were scary because that’s when they would probe your lines. 
were all the true stories and horror stories and legends about them coming up 
and slitting your throat while you’re right there in your sleeping hole. 
have had some fact behind it, but they were very good at infiltrating our lines. 
So nights were long and scary. 
out your morning cigarette and coffee, that was a nice time, if the sun was 
shining. 
miserable down in the valleys. 
With the light came a sense of security. 
could see out there, and you could tell if there was anything coming at you. 
The exception of that was when you were on the move. 
the time, platoon patrols. 
watching you at times. 
It’s almost like you had a big target painted on you. 
When thing I worried about was my face, my head. 
than being shot in the chest or the back which would have been a lot more 
likely, but you couldn’t let those fears control you. 
You had to go on. 
stay busy. 
ok. 
You function. 
That’s what everybody had to do. 
Yeah, we were scared a lot, but it never kept us from functioning. 
Steve Allen Interview # VRV-V-D-2015-064 
13 
where it would keep them from functioning you got rid of. 
the rear. 
Kranich One of the things I’m really interested in is you referenced earlier a little bit 
about the enemy and the actions of the Vietcong and the NVA. 
view as the enemy in Vietnam 
Allen I very much envisioned the NVA and the Vietcong as the enemy. 
the enemy. 
They were shooting at us. 
They were setting booby traps. 
were out to kill us, very definitely. 
That’s pretty much black and white to me. 
Kranich I mean I’m a little nervous to ask this. 
Allen Don’t be afraid to ask. 
Kranich You’re obviously a very moral man. 
and your time in it. 
happened if you had grown up in Vietnam and were the NVA or something 
like that Could you take me into their shoes a little bit 
Allen I suppose what you had is that the people in the country were like me and my 
country down there. 
Live me the heck alone, you know. 
through, and they want me to do it their way. 
and want me to do it their way. 
Just leave me alone. 
paddy and my ox and my chickens and ducks, and get out of my life. 
my family and me alone. 
Well, nobody would leave them alone. 
part of why we were there supposedly was the domino theory of the 
Communists coming through and nation after nation being overtaken by 
Communism. 
A lot of the seed coming from Communist China. 
real thing, a real threat Well, yeah. 
enough that they don’t see that as a real threat, but certainly I think it was at 
least to some extent. 
things Well like I say, if I grew up in a rural area in South Vietnam I’d want 
to be left alone. 
discouraged with the lack of character in my government officials. 
excited about the possibility that I’d see the capitalist endeavors or the 
westernization of certain amenities that I would have. 
attractive to me as a young person I would think, but politically if I believed in 
what the communists were doing to unite the country under communist rule 
and Ho Chi Minh being the big guy. 
fight for it. 
If I grew up in North Vietnam, I wouldn’t have had any choice. 
was a certain age and they wanted me to fight for communism in the south, 
that’s exactly what would happen. 
There would be no choice. 
answer your question 
Kranich Yeah. 
company between Smitty and the seven men you guys lost. 
