1 
Introduction 
“The common ingredients of the Iran and Contra policies were secrecy, deception, and disdain 
for the law.
public one and a secret one” (Report of the Congressional Committees Investigating the Iran- 
Contra Affair). 
The Iran-Contra Affair of 1984-1987 was not one, but two separate covert foreign policy 
issues concerning two different problems, in two separate countries, that were dealt in two very 
different ways. 
policies intersected at certain important points giving rise to the singular title, Iran-Contra Affair. 
The first covert foreign policy initiative was the continued support for the democratic rebel 
Contras against the communist Sandinistas in Nicaragua in a time when Congress had cut off 
funds to the Contras. 
exchange for the release of American hostages held by Iranian allies in Lebanon. 
policies intersected when profits from the arms sales to Iran were used to support the Nicaraguan 
Contras through third parties and private funds. 
This overview of the Iran-Contra Affair is organized into the following sections: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
2 
Institutional History: NSC and CIA 
The National Security Council (“NSC”) and the Central Intelligence Agency (“CIA”) 
developed in such a way that structurally allowed each to work around Congress and have the 
Executive Branch and third party actors implement and frame the foreign policy of the entire 
Unites States. 
groups. 
The beginning starts with the National Security Act of July 26, 1947. 
piece of legislation that gave birth simultaneously to both the National Security Council and the 
Central Intelligence Agency. 
The NSC was not originally founded to facilitate presidential decision making, but it 
evolved with each administration until it became structured and powerful enough to perform 
covert operations. 
“virtual adjunct of the presidency.
President and not the NSC directly, turning the Presidency into a bureaucracy itself. 
Kennedy administration’s changes to the NSC were driven by the Bay of Pigs incident that left 
Kennedy skeptical of the traditional departments and led him to prefer a more direct and personal 
style of executing policies. 
operation” was altered.
also function operationally. 
furthered a trend of inflating the Office of the President through its replication of the rest of the 
government. 
competed with, and other times ignored other governmental agencies and offices. 
1 Draper, Theodore. 
A Very Thin Line: the Iran-Contra Affairs. 
New York: Hill and Wang, 1991, p. 
2 Draper, p. 
3 
The inflationary trend continued with the Reagan administration. 
further professionalized with a staff of about forty-five under the National Security Advisor 
Robert McFarlane and more than 200 people in support.
reflection of the State Department under Robert McFarlane’s successor, John Poindexter when it 
was organized into twelve directorates i.e. 
the African office, European Office, etc. 
most hurt, and most undermined by this trend was the Secretary of State, George Shultz during 
the Reagan administration, because now the president was performing similar duties, with 
similar staff support from his own office. 
out the president’s wishes covertly- even from the rest of the government.
Oliver North, deputy director of political-military affairs for the National Security Council staff 
was deeply involved in both the Iran and Contra affairs. 
Like the NSC, the CIA evolved with the different Presidential administrations. 
Eisenhower, the 1955 NSC directive outlined the spectrum of the CIA’s covert operations in an 
effort to turn the CIA into a “virtual Cold War machine against Communism-“ to “create and 
exploit troublesome problems for international Communism.
control over any areas of the world” and “develop underground resistance and facilitate covert 
and guerilla operations.
with U.S. 
foreign and military policies. 
check on presidential power by Congress did not include a check of covert wars and paramilitary 
activities that the CIA was authorized to conduct. 
administration was William Casey. 
The Nicaraguan Story 
3 Draper, p. 
4 Draper, p. 
5 Draper, p. 
Somoza Dynasty 
The U.S. 
amicable with and aligned to American interests. 
As early as 1912 the U.S. 
force to quell rebellions against American approved leaders or to help overthrow unwanted 
regimes. 
Therefore, when U.S. 
forcefully took power in 1936, the U.S. 
under Augusto César Sandino. 
rule which lasted for the next 43 years. 
(“FSLN”), named in honor of Sandino, was created in opposition to the Somoza dynasty. 
Ideologically, the Sandinistas saw themselves as a Marxist-Leninist organization with aims of 
turning Nicaragua into a socialist state. 
Sandinistas worked to create and consolidate their power in the context of a cold war era where 
socialist revolutions and uprisings were gaining in worldwide popularity. 
In 1967, Anastasio Somoza Debayle, son of Somoza García, became president. 
became notorious in Nicaragua for suppressing opposition and focusing on self-enrichment while 
in power. 
Somoza exercised “emergency powers” to address the earthquake which in actuality resulted in 
him and his close friends confiscating the majority of international aid sent to help rebuild 
Nicaragua. 
especially among the Sandinistas. 
In 1974, the Sandinistas kidnapped several Nicaraguan elites at a Christmas Party. 
Somoza responded to the affair by declaring a state of siege which spiraled into a series of 
serious human rights violations and guerilla attacks on peasants. 
5 
hyper-sensitive to the threat of communism and in conjunction with a contemporaneous trend of 
protecting human rights victims, began to pay attention to Nicaraguan affairs for the first time 
since the Somoza dynasty commenced in 1936. 
shaped not only by a consciousness of human rights, but also by a fatigue of foreign intervention 
due to the Vietnam War. 
improved its human rights violations. 
Somoza responded by lifting the state of siege. 
met by the Sandinistas re-initiating and expanding their attacks which were now supported by 
business elites including Alfonso Robelo, and academics, including Adolfo Calero. 
Sandinistas in Power: U.
On July 19, 1979, the Sandinista uprising culminated in their gaining full power in 
Nicaragua. 
emergency and expropriate land and businesses owned by the old dynastic family and friends, 
nationalize banks, mines, and transit systems, abolish old courts, denounce churches, and nullify 
the constitution, laws, and elections. 
A socialist state was born in Nicaragua. 
immediately sent $99 million in aid to the FSLN in an attempt to keep the new regime pro-U.S.. 
Simultaneously, however, Cuban officials were advising the FSLN on foreign and domestic 
policy and the FSLN sought an alliance with the Soviet bloc which they reached by March 1980 
signing economic, cultural, technological, and scientific agreements with the USSR. 
of Soviet weapons from Cuba began almost immediately after the signing of these agreements. 
It was mid-1980 when José Cardenal and Enrique Bermúdez founded what would 
become the Nicaraguan Democratic Force, or FDN, the main contra group (“the Contras”). 
Contras found support among the populations disaffected by Sandinista policies – i.e. 
evangelicals, farmers, Nicaraguan Indians, Creoles, and other disgruntled and disenfranchised 
6 
parties. 
The Argentinean government was the first to support the Contras. 
the Contras, trained the military forces, and chose the Contra leadership whereas the U.S. 
on the role of supplying money and arms. 
the Somoza regime because of their use of brutal tactics against noncombatants and their alleged 
human rights abuses. 
Once it became clear to Washington that the FSLN would not moderate its policies, 
President Carter authorized the CIA to support resistance forces in Nicaragua including 
propaganda efforts, but not including armed action. 
socialism abroad, including sending weapons to leftist rebels in El Salvador beginning in 1980 
and continuing for the next ten years. 
was also in effort to insure that the Soviets would fully support and protect Nicaragua in case of 
a U.S. 
attack or intervention. 
on U.
Srelations throughout the 80’s. 
Reagan Administration: Intervention and Propoganda 
January 20, 1981, Ronald Reagan was inaugurated during a rightward shift in U.S. 
politics. 
of Salvadoran rebels. 
perceived dissidents under the belief that the U.S. 
would invade. 
signed an order that allowed the CIA to support the Contras with arms, equipment, and money. 
This order was implemented in conjunction with an overall strengthening of U.S. 
Central America and the belief that covert activities are the most effective way to put pressure on 
a regime. 
culminated in June 1982 with the Reagan Doctrine which called for supporting democratization 
9 
7 
everywhere. 
from one of simply interdicting arms to one of supporting a change in government. 
historian Theodore Draper, among others, argued, that this was the real goal all the long. 
To help popularize the foreign policy changes of the Reagan administration certain 
propaganda and media initiatives were implemented to sway public and congressional opinion. 
In January of 1983, National Security Decisions Directive was signed, entitled “Management of 
Public Diplomacy Relative to National Security,” institutionalizing public diplomacy. 
was a special planning group within the NSC to coordinate public diplomacy campaigns.
group was America’s first peacetime propaganda ministry. 
influence public opinion, but not until Reagan was it so institutionalized. 
propaganda,” which Richard Miller described as "actually putting out [the] truth, straight 
information, not deception," was the State Department’s Group of Latin American Public 
Diplomacy (S/LPD).
within the State Department. 
efforts. 
Advisor Robert McFarlane explained over 80 publicity stunts to influence public and 
congressional opinion before upcoming Contra aid votes.
leaked select pieces of information that they wanted made public to journalists who favored 
Reagan. 
manage the public perceptions of the American efforts in South America. 
Boland I & II and the Beginnings of Covert Defiance of Congress 
6 Perry, Robert, and Peter Kornbluh. 
"Iran-Contra's Untold Story.
"Foreign Policy 72 (1988). 
Web. 
14 Nov. 
2010, p. 
7 Robert and Kornbluh, p. 
8 Robert and Kornbluh, p. 
8 
Despite all the propaganda efforts, a series of high-profile articles began to divide the 
Executive Branch and the Legislature over the topic of Nicaragua and Contra support. 
the CIA gained a more prominent role in the training and funding of the Contras. 
the attention of Newsweek, whose cover story on November 8, 1982 was entitled “America’s 
Secret War: Nicaragua.
government,” 9 and prompted a heated editorial response in The Boston Globe. 
article sparked Massachusetts Representative Edward P. 
end all funding of Nicaraguan efforts. 
funding came on December 21, 1982 with the first Boland Amendment which barred “the use of 
funds ‘for the purpose of’ overthrowing the government of Nicaragua or provoking a war 
between Nicaragua and Honduras.
In a joint session of Congress, President Reagan said, “The Congress shares both the 
power and the responsibility for our foreign policy,” but by the time Congress exercised said 
shared power by passing Boland I, the Reagan administration had already committed itself to 
supporting the Contras unconditionally and at any cost- even if that meant defying Congress.
Open defiance was impossible, so covert defiance was adopted as the Executive Branch’s new 
normal. 
U.S. 
itself did not intend to overthrow the Nicaraguan government, the U.S. 
Contras under a different guise such as humanitarian aid or by the solicitation of money from 
third-party funds and private actors. 
in Nicaragua. 
9 Draper, Theodore. 
A Very Thin Line: the Iran-Contra Affairs. 
New York: Hill and Wang, 1991, p. 
10 Draper, p. 
During the second half of 1983, the CIA helped the Contras to conduct air strikes on 
Sandino airport near Managua in addition to other targets. 
implement some of the covert actions in Nicaragua, including destroying several fuel tanks. 
CIA also placed mines in Nicaraguan harbors on January 7, 1984 and February 29, 1984, 
damaging several ships. 
by The Wall Street Journal that the mines were placed by the CIA. 
Journal disclosed that Lieutenant Colonel Oliver North, a U.S. 
National Security Council staff at the Reagan White House, had knowledge of and encouraged 
such actions. 
Oliver North would become an integral figure in the Iran-Contra Affair. 
Also at this time, National Security advisor Robert McFarlane began meeting with Israeli 
counterpart David Kimche inquiring to whether or not Israel would help support the Contras. 
The solicitation of Israel proved unsuccessful, but a few months later, McFarlane secured money 
from Saudi Arabia in support of the Contras. 
solicited the funds, but simply mentioning the loss of the Contra aid was enough to insight the 
Saudis to provide money for the cause. 
Saudi Arabia from 1984-1986. 
affair. 
setting up a private tax-exempt organization to raise money for the Contras. 
Channell led this effort to secure private funds, many of the larger donors meeting with Oliver 
North and even President Reagan directly. 
Realizing the ineffectiveness of Boland I, Congress, still determined to stop the flow of 
funds to Nicaragua, passed a second Boland Amendment on October 12, 1984 which reads: 
“During fiscal year 1985, no funds available to the Central Intelligence Agency, the 
Department of Defense, or any other agency or entity of the United States involved in 
14 
10 
intelligence activities may be obligated or expended for the purpose or which would have 
the effect of supporting directly or indirectly, military or paramilitary operations in 
Nicaragua by any nation, group, organization, movement or individual.
Boland II left two loopholes for getting money to the Contras. 
Boland I, was to solicit third-party funds from private donors or third party countries to give 
money to the Contras. 
principal forum for considering national security and foreign policy matters with his senior 
national security advisors and cabinet officials” based on the logic that the NSC is not covered 
under Boland. 
activity. 
keep the Contras together “body and soul.
operational support of the contras: arms deals, air supply ops and intelligence support, and 
further solicitation of additional third party funds. 
Arms Deals: In addition to seeking alternative funding, North and others sought to 
provide the contras with arms and supplies. 
Air Force General, and Albert Hakim an Iranian businessmen to supply the Contras with arms. 
November 1984 the three solidified their first agreement and by the end of the following summer 
over $11 million in arms were given to the Contras via private funds. 
Air Supply Ops: In 1985, North worked with Secord to “build and oversee an air 
resupply operation for the contras.
order to carry out this operation which was functional and successfully delivering arms to the 
Contras by May 1986. 
aircraft was shot down by the Sandinistas, and crewmember Eugene Hasenfus was captured. 
This would eventually lead to the full exposure of the operation. 
11 Draper, p. 
11 
Intelligence Support: North also provided “broader strategic military advice.
shared U.S. 
equipment shipments into Nicaragua. 
The Diversion Scheme 
When private funding and third party governments did not provide as much support 
as North wanted for the Contras, North came upon the idea of overcharging the Iranians for 
weapons sold to them by Americans “and using the surplus to fund the Contra resupply 
operation and other covert activities.
the Diversion Memo to the new National Security Advisor John Poindexter and President 
Reagan in which he outlined how $12 MM of the profit Secord and Hakim made from the 
sale of arms to Iran “will be used to purchase critically needed supplies for the Nicaraguan 
Democratic Resistance Forces.
diversion scheme that was the most controversial and explosive. 
Secord and Hakim were motivated by the potential to profit from the activities they 
engaged in, thus the Contras did not receive all the money given to their cause. 
“For all the controversy raised about the diversion, the Contras were fortunate if they received $2 
million worth of tangible benefits [between January and October 1986,] an amount that paled in 
comparison to the far less controversial $32 million they ultimately received from Saudi 
Arabia.
”With government funding, 100% of the money goes directly to the beneficiary. 
third party and private actors, a portion of that will be allocated as profit. 
Intelligence Authorization Act: Congress Open to Re-supporting Contras 
Congress changed its position on Contra funding with a series of amendments and 
provisions that resulted in the loosening of the Boland language. 
12 
originally aimed to prevent all funds from flowing into Nicaragua, but from 1985-1986 Congress 
began qualifying which funds and for what purposes was acceptable. 
passed a provision which allocated $14 million directly to the Contras for humanitarian 
assistance. 
Congress outlawed most U.S. 
Department, from soliciting money from third-party countries to fund the Contras for 
“humanitarian assistance only.
the money donated was from the countries’ own funds and that the U.S. 
express or implied arrangement making U.S. 
contingent on the third country’s assistance to the contras.
“quid pro quo” statement between the U.S. 
and the third country. 
Authorization Bill allowed the CIA to provide training and intelligence to the Contras as long as 
it did not “amount to participation in the planning for execution of military or paramilitary 
operations” or participation in “logistics activities integral to such operations.
1986, Congress passed a provision allocating $100MM of their own budget in aid to the Contras. 
The Iran Story 
From Secular to Islamic Republic 
As an oil rich nation, Iran is a country that the U.S. 
in. 
The U.S. 
Shah Pahlavi’s, secular, yet authoritarian, rule. 
States’ strongest allies in the Middle East. 
It was this close relationship with the U.S. 
foundation in the Shah’s secularism that ultimately served as an impetus for riots and 
demonstrations to break out across Iran in 1978. 
13 
number culminating in the Shah leaving Iran in January 1979 and Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini 
naming Iran an Islamic Republic. 
Ayatollah Khomeini immediately severed all ties with the U.S. 
and declared Israel an illegitimate country. 
consolidating his power. 
Iran shifted from the U.
Middle East to an American enemy virtually overnight. 
The U.
influencing the region, quickly moved to “normalize relations” with Iran. 
the Muslim Followers of the line of the Imam, a fundamentalist, anti-imperialist group made up 
predominately of young radical revolutionaries, seized the U.S. 
4, 1979, symbolizing the end of cordial diplomacy between the two nations. 
were taken by this group and the Iranian government and general public supported their actions 
further antagonizing relations between the two former allies. 
eventually released the day of President Reagan’s inauguration, more hostages would soon be 
taken, and relations would further be galvanized. 
Iran’s need for Weapons Result in U.S. 
Iran’s need for weapons during the Iran-Iraq war from 1980-1990 complicated the 
Iranian-American relations. 
In the beginning of the Iran-Iraq war, the U.S. 
arms embargo against Iran called Operation Staunch and religious fundamentalist group Islamic 
Holy War took more U.S. 
hostages beginning in March 1984. 
and the United States’ desire to re-open diplomatic relations that in 1985 led Manucher 
Ghorbanifar, an Iranian businessman working with the U.
Arabian arms dealer, to devise a skeleton plan for what would later become the Iran arms deal. 
This deal would alter Iranian-American relations and lead to the most controversial piece of the 
Iran-Contra scandal: the diversion of funds from the sale of weapons to Iran to supporting the 
Nicaraguan Contras. 
On July 1, 1985, the New York Times quoted President Ronald Reagan saying, “The 
United States gives terrorists no rewards. 
We make no concessions, we make no deals.
days later, McFarlane met with Israeli David Kimche (who had previously met with Khashoggi 
and Ghorbanifar) and the arms-for-hostages deal was first outlined as both a means to obtain the 
release of American hostages in addition to an attempt to improve diplomatic relations. 
days after Reagan denounced bartering with terrorists on July 16, 1985, McFarlane visited 
President Reagan and his Chief of Staff Donald Regan while the President was in the hospital 
recovering from abdominal surgery. 
hostages deal that specifically called for the selling of 100 American made TOW antitank 
missiles to Iran via Israel in exchange for some if not all American hostages and open 
communications with Iran. 
America would also send replacement TOWs to Israel. 
conflicting accounts of what was said and agreed to at this meeting. 
McFarlane saying to the President, “they had been approached by the Israelis, who had had 
contact that they would put us in touch with that could lead to a breakthrough in reaching 
elements in the Government of Iran” and “that this could lead to some help in the hostage 
situation because we suspected that the Iranians were in some way connected in to the group who 
had abducted the Americans.
the hospital. 
letting the Israelis do anything they wanted.
recall [Reagan] said that he could understand how people who were trying to overthrown a 
12 Draper, p. 
13 Draper, p. 
15 
government would need weapons, but we weren’t yet sure about whether they were legitimate. 
So he said that we, the United States, could not do it.
stories of that day. 
in 1990 he agreed that during the meeting he first became aware of the arms-for hostage 
initiative in Iran.
The Enterprise 
On August 20, 1985, the first load of 96 TOW missiles was sent from Israel to Iran. 
Khashoggi provided “bridge financing,” posting $1 million of his private funds until Iran paid 
Israel for the weapons. 
Iran and Schwimmer and Nimrodi for Israel. 
Lt. 
affair by McFarlane to manage logistics in the interest of the United States. 
stay involved in Iran when Poindexter succeeded McFarlane. 
hostage Benjamin Weir was released after 408 more TOWs were shipped to Iran. 
from the deal went to Ghorbanifar, Schwimmer or Nimrodi. 
Major General Richard Secord was brought into the Iran affair by North to help resupply 
Israel’s weapon store and organize logistical issues such as moving “sensitive material” between 
Israel and Iran. 
In November 1985, a second load of missiles was sold to Iran. 
provided the first funds that were diverted to the Nicaraguan Contras. 
covertly, and without the knowledge of Congress, Secord and Hakim established a company 
called the Stanford Technology Trading Group International which was commonly known as 
“The Enterprise.
Resources Swiss bank account for the second arms shipment. 
14 Draper, p. 
15 Draper, p. 
16 Draper, p. 
16 
used only for Nicaraguan Contra business.
weapons, the other $850,000 was diverted, by North, to be used to support the Contras. 
Ordinarily the entire million would’ve been paid back to the Israelis, but in this instance, North 
“told them we used it for the purpose of the Contras, and they acknowledged that” –and they 
never asked for the money back.
Ghorbanifar suggested that any extra money made through the arms sales be diverted to aiding 
the Contras. 
McFarlane’s successor, John Poindexter, approved this plan. 
Lisbon Airport Crisis 
The Second shipment of arms-for-hostages mentioned briefly above was a logistical 
nightmare that North described as “a horror story.
22nd , 1985, 120 Hawk missiles would be shipped from Israel to Portugal on an Israeli 747. 
Portugal the weapons would be unloaded, stored, and reloaded on a non-Israeli plane and 
shipped to Iran in two intervals. 
hostages. 
to Iran.
necessary special clearances to land the cargo of arms at the Portuguese airport in Lisbon. 
Schwimmer found the authorities hesitant to grant him permission. 
North got involved and met with Israeli Defense Minister Rabin in New York on November 18 th 
about the operational logistics of shipping the “oil drilling equipment” to Iran.
logistics, North brought Secord on board rather than using someone from the U.S. 
because Secord had close ties with leading Portuguese arms dealer, Defex. 
17 Draper, p. 
18 Draper, p. 
19 Draper, p. 
20 Draper, p. 
21 “At the Poindexter trial, North said that Rabin had told him the number of missiles they were trying to ship and some overflight clearance 
problems they were having. 
,North told Rabin he would get back to him after checking for authorization. 
cargo was made up of missiles, not oil-drilling equipment.
17 
The first effort to get airport clearance was described to the Portuguese Foreign Ministry 
as Defex working with a retired American general to ship arms to Iran. 
officials because of what they understood as the United States’ opposition to all shipments of 
arms to Iran under Operation Staunch. 
in regards to who was making this arms shipment request- the United States Government, or a 
private citizen. 
When that request was denied, North worked with Dewey R. 
the European division of the CIA, to help deal with the Lisbon airport crisis and try again to 
obtain airport clearance. 
were being asked to help in a weapons shipment” as not to later be charged with violating 
Operation Staunch.
Ultimately North and Clarridge used an alternate plan utilizing “proprietary” airline 
flights to make the arms shipment. 
the CIA but operates as if it were an ordinary commercial operation when not utilized for special 
CIA assignment. 
controller in Frankfurt that “an urgent fight” that was “in the interest of the U.S. 
would need to be flown. 
problems in Cyprus, Turkey, and culminating in the realization that the wrong missiles had been 
sent once they reached Tehran. 
the operation under U.S. 
instead of Israeli management, this time with more success. 
After experiencing difficulties such as the second arms shipment and problems in 
securing the discussed exchanges with Iran, on January 17, 1986, President Reagan signed a 
Presidential Finding authorizing direct U.S. 
arms sales to Iran. 
22 Draper, p. 
23 Draper, p. 
18 
still be used as a third party to release the U.S. 
of any liability. 
base, but it would no longer buy and sell weapons. 
weapons directly on behalf of the United States. 
The Second Channel 
After continuing difficulties in securing the release of hostages from Iran, North and 
Secord determined that the U.S. 
Hakim in charge of the effort. 
Hashemi Bahramani, worked out a nine-point plan that compromised both his and the Iranians’ 
interests. 
The resulting agreement was that the U.S. 
for the release of “1 ½ hostages (1 definitely and the 2nd with all effective possible effort).
also offered to pay the U.S. 
$3.
funds could be diverted to the Contras. 
Hakim, serving as a “U.S. 
his nine-point plan beginning in October 28, 1986 with the first shipment of arms. 
Of the $3.
million Iran paid to the Enterprise, $2 million of this was given to the CIA who supplied the 
weapons, and the remaining $1.
6million was diverted to the Contras. 
Unraveling the Story 
On November 3, 1986, two Lebanese newspapers broke the story of the Iran arms deal, 
and quickly thereafter the entire scandal began to unravel in the United States. 
weeks following the newspaper leak were marked by an increasing crisis of confidence in the 
government as facts rapidly became public. 
to the diversion scheme found its way into the press. 
Nov. 
Arms and Contra Aid Controversy and again addressed the nation in a press conference on 
19 
November 19th . 
On the 13 th , Reagan said that the U.S. 
but on the 19 th , he admitted to working with a “particular group,”24 implying he dealt with 
terrorist organizations. 
when Reagan stated that, “we did not condone and do not condone the shipment of arms from 
other countries.
admitted that the White House condoned an Israeli shipment of Arms to Iran in September 1985. 
By the 19th , virtually everything about the Iran side of the affair had come out: missiles and spare 
parts to Iran, the role of Israel, McFarlane’s mission to Tehran, North, Ghorbanifar, etc.
Reagan’s blunders during the November 19th conference set into motion public discourse on the 
President’s credibility and role in the whole affair. 
On November 21st , Oliver North engaged in what he would later be referred to as a 
“shredding party,” destroying potentially incriminating documents, helped by his secretary Fawn 
Hall, in anticipation of the Justice Department lawyers coming to search his office the next day. 
North did not, however, destroy the smoking gun of the connection between the Iran arms sales 
and the funding for the Nicaraguan contras, the Diversion Memo. 
Assistant Attorney General Reynolds, and Chief of Staff to Attorney General Richardson 
interviewed North about the document, the Reagan administration raced to release this 
information to the public. 
the possibility of impeachment, President Reagan himself publicly acknowledged diversion 
scheme of the arms deal to the public.
November 25, 1986 Reagan held a press conference where Attorney General Meese 
responded to the majority of questions. 
24 Draper, 482. 
25 Draper, 482. 
26 Draper, 498. 
27 Draper, p. 
533. 
20 
Admiral Poindexter.
charges was discussed and North, watching from a TV in his office, found out simultaneously 
with the general public that he could be facing criminal charges.
resigned as National Security Advisor, and North, who was only detailed to the NSC and 
appointed as assistant to the President was transferred back to the Marines. 
Investigating the Iran-Contra Affair 
Three mechanisms were established to uncover the truth of the Iran-Contra Affair in 
hopes of regaining public trust in addition to fully understand the scandal: a special review board 
appointed by Reagan, an independent counsel per-Meese’s request, and the holding of 
immunized joint-congressional hearings. 
The Tower Commission 
On November 26, 1986, one day after President Reagan and Attorney General Edwin 
Meese held a press conference at which they publicized the diversions scheme, President Reagan 
appointed former US. 
Tower Commission. 
operation of the National Security Council in general and the role of the NSC staff in 
particular.
the NSC itself was sound, and placed a heavy amount of blame on Chief of Staff Regan and 
National Security Advisor Poindexter. 
“guilty” nor claimed that he knew more than he was leading on to, it did argue that Reagan 
should have been more informed, criticizing his managerial style of running the White House for 
causing him to act with neglect and lack of oversight. 
28 Draper, p. 
547. 
29 Draper, p. 
548. 
30 Tower Commission Findings 
21 
Independent Counsel Walsh 
Per Request of Attorney General Meese III, a panel of three judges appointed an 
Independent Counsel, Lawrence Walsh, to investigate the legal issues of the Iran-Contra affairs 
on December 19th, 1986. 
requested an official appointment by the U.S. 
to avoid challenges over the constitutionality of using an Independent Counsel (Note: Morrison 
v. 
Olson had not yet been decided). 
immunity granted to the joint-committee hearings. 
Congress in a report dated April 28, 1987. 
refusal to declassify documents even if necessary to conduct a fair trial. 
General can overrule this refusal. 
people that were criminally charged. 
seven pleaded guilty to either felonies or misdemeanors, one case was dismissed, and two that 
were awaiting trial were pardoned by George H.W. 
Bush. 
On March 5, 1987, the joint hearings of the House Select Committee to investigate 
Covert Arms Transactions with Iran and the Senate Select Committee on Secret Military 
Assistance to Iran and the Nicaraguan Opposition, later referred to simply as the Iran- Contra 
hearings, began and lasted for 41-days. 
the purpose of the hearings: 
“Our hearings are neither pro-Contra nor anti-Contra, neither pro-Administration nor 
anti-Administration. 
We are not prosecutors; and this is not an adversarial proceeding. 
We meet here as American citizens, united in a common effort to find the facts lest we 
repeat the mistakes.
22 
The witnesses were granted immunity under the Fifth Amendment to prevent self-incrimination 
and in an effort to uncover all the facts. 
Oliver North and the John Poindexter. 
Oliver North 
Oliver North’s immunized testimony before the joint-congressional committee began on 
July 7 th and lasted until the July 14th , 1987. 
decorations of valor from Vietnam, the handsome soldier promised on the first day to tell the 
truth, “the good, the bad, and the ugly.
(Reagan called him both in December 1986) but ultimately his favorability rating was 67% after 
his testimony. 
During the hearings, North admitted to shredding documents because the Attorney 
General’s people were coming to look through his office the next day: 
“Mr. 
NIELDS: And you shredded documents before they got there? 
Mr. 
other days, but perhaps with increased intensity; that's correct.
North’s testimony also revealed his willingness to engage in controversial, possibly illegal, 
covert activities: 
“Mr. 
NORTH. 
easy to me. 
body, but I think we all had to weigh in the balance the difference 
between lives and lies. 
both these operations, and it is not an easy thing to do.
The hearings’ Majority Report concluded that “North’s testimony demonstrates that he also lied 
to members of the Executive branch, including the Attorney General, and officials of the State 
Department, CIA and NSC.
23 
American people about the Contra covert action and Iran arms sales, and that he altered and 
destroyed official documents” 
The hearing’s Majority Report referred to North as the central figure of the Iran-Contra 
Affair. 
coordination and involvement in all activities and secret operations that made him the leading 
character. 
documented. 
[He] assumed when [he] had approval to proceed from.
Admiral Poindexter, that they had indeed solicited and obtained the approval of the President.
The hearings committee Majority Report recognized this causal chain of command, but North 
admitted that simply following orders alone was not sufficient grounds for breaking the law. 
“Both he and adm. 
because they did not use money appropriated by the Congress.
utilized again by North when he testified that he got a legal opinion from the staff counsel of the 
President’s Intelligence Oversight Board (“IOB”) - a group of civilians appointed by the 
President to act as an independent watchdog over intelligence organizations, that confirmed that 
the NSC was not violating Boland restrictions as long as the “solicitation, banking, and 
movement of supplies were done outside the United States.
Reagan years had previously failed the bar exam four times before passing and had never written 
a legal opinion until his appraisal of the relevance of the Boland amendment to the NSC. 
substantive legal advice was sought from the Justice Department, the State Department, the 
White House counsel, or any other administrative official within the government.
31 Gutmann, Amy, and Dennis F. 
Thompson. 
Ethics and Politics: Cases and Comments. 
3rd ed. 
Belmont, CA: Thomson/Wadsworth, 2006, p. 
32 Ethics and Politics. 
33 Draper, Theodore. 
A Very Thin Line: the Iran-Contra Affairs. 
New York: Hill and Wang, 1991, p. 
34 Johnson, Loch K. 
America's Secret Power: the CIA in a Democratic Society. 
New York: Oxford UP, 1989, p. 
35 Strong, Robert A. 
Decisions and Dilemmas: Case Studies in Presidential Foreign Policy Making since 1945. 
M.E. 
Sharpe, M.E. 
Sharpe. 
p. 
24 
John Poindexter 
John Poindexter’s immunized testimony immediately followed Oliver North’s and lasted 
from July 15-17 to July 20-21, 1987. 
stark contrast to North. 
hearings, “this issue is not a Navy issue,” Poindexter was much more awkward, less dynamic, 
and not as handsome as North. 
to ‘what did the President know and when did he know it?
Poindexter who took full responsibility for the affair. 
Scandal where John Dean turned against Nixon in the public hearings.
Poindexter testified that the “buck” stopped with him and that Reagan knew nothing 
about the dispersion plan. 
informing the President: first, Poindexter, unlike McFarlane did not believe that the Boland 
Amendment applied to the NSC, thereby Poindexter believed that the diversion of funds to the 
Contras was legal; second, he saw the diversion as a “detail” of the larger political goal of aiding 
the Contras; and third, “the president would have supported the policy had he known about it.
Chairman Hamilton criticized Poindexter for claiming the buck stops with him because “that is 
not where the buck is supposed to stop,” arguing that Poindexter only wanted “to deflect 
responsibility from the President and that should not be done in our system of government.
Poindexter admitted during his testimony that he destroyed Reagan’s signed finding that sent 
arms to Iran on November 21, 1986 in order to avoid “political embarrassment,” and he also 
claimed to “not recall” several key incidents. 
36 Busby, Robert. 
Reagan and the Iran-Contra Affair: the Politics of Presidential Recovery. 
New York: St. 
Martin's, 1999, p. 
184. 
37 Williams, Robert. 
Political Scandals in the USA. 
Chicago, IL: Fitzroy Dearborn Pub.
,2000, p. 
48. 
38 Gutmann, Amy, and Dennis F. 
Thompson. 
Ethics and Politics: Cases and Comments. 
3rd ed. 
Belmont, CA: Thomson/Wadsworth, 2006, p. 
25 
testimony believed that he was “covering up” for others in the administration, and a majority said 
he was covering up for the President. 
The Majority Report of the Congressional Committees Investigating the Iran-Contra 
Affair, released on November 18, 1987, like the Tower Commission, criticized Reagan for his 
blunders: 
“The President himself told the public that the U.S. 
Hasenfus airplane. 
foundation.
’He told the public that the United States had not traded arms for hostages. 
He told the public that the United States had not condoned the arms sales by Israel to 
Iran, when in fact he had approved them and signed a Finding, later destroyed by 
Poindexter, recording his approval. 
All of these statements by the President were wrong.
and his lack of oversight: 
“Nevertheless, the ultimate responsibility for the events in the Iran-Contra Affair must 
rest with the President. 
were doing, he should have. 
subordinates that they must keep him advised of important actions they take for the 
Administration. 
faithfully executed.
his Administration in no doubt that the rule of law governs.
The day before the hearings began, 63% of Americans felt that “it's time for the country 
to give the president the benefit of the doubt and put the Iran arms affair behind us.
of those questioned during the hearings said that they would care “a great deal” if Reagan had 
known about the diversion scheme. 
say that Congress spent too much time on the investigation. 
important questions had not even been answered. 
United States with several enduring issues. 
39 “Most in Poll Say Witness is Hiding Facts.
”The Washington Posit 17 July 1987. 
40 Harris Poll, May 4, 1987. 
Reproduced with permission from the Tribune Media Services, Inc. 
41 “Iran-Contra Pardons Favored; Poll Reflects Limited Concern about Affair.
”The Washington Post 23 July 1987. 
42 “Current Public Opinion Surveyed.
”Facts on File World News Digest 7 August 1987. 
26 
Bibliography 
Byrne, Malcolm, and Peter Kornbluh. 
1988. 
Alexandria, VA: Chadwyck-Healey, 1990. 
Busby, Robert. 
Reagan and the Iran-Contra Affair: the Politics of Presidential Recovery. 
York: St. 
Martin's, 1999. 
“Current Public Opinion Surveyed.
”Facts on File World News Digest 7 August 1987. 
Draper, Theodore. 
A Very Thin Line: the Iran-Contra Affairs. 
New York: Hill and Wang, 1991. 
Fried, Amy. 
Muffled Echoes: Oliver North and the Politics of Public Opinion. 
Columbia UP, 1997. 
Gutmann, Amy, and Dennis F. 
Thompson. 
Ethics and Politics: Cases and Comments. 
3rd ed. 
Belmont, CA: Thomson/Wadsworth, 2006. 
“Iran-Contra Pardons Favored; Poll Reflects Limited Concern about Affair.
Post 23 July 1987. 
Johnson, Loch K. 
America's Secret Power: the CIA in a Democratic Society. 
UP, 1989. 
“Most in Poll Say Witness is Hiding Facts.
”The Washington Posit 17 July 1987. 
Perry, Robert, and Peter Kornbluh. 
"Iran-Contra's Untold Story.
"Foreign Policy 72 (1988). 
Web. 
14 Nov. 
2010. 
<http://americanempireproject.
eOfIran-Contra/PublicDiplomacyAsDomesticCovertOps/Iran-ContrasUntoldStory- 
PublicDiplomacyAsCovertOp-PeterKornbluhRobertParry.pdf>. 
Strong, Robert A. 
since 1945. 
M.E. 
Sharpe, M.E. 
Sharpe. 
Web. 
Williams, Robert. 
Political Scandals in the USA. 
Chicago, IL: Fitzroy Dearborn Pub.
,2000. 
Overview written by Rachel Hunter, Brown 2012 
